---
subtitle: |
  **Internship Report**

  [Introduction]{.underline}

  During my internship at NULL CLASS, I had the opportunity to work on
  real-world Data Science projects aimed at applying Natural Language
  Processing (NLP) techniques to practical problems. This internship
  provided valuable hands-on experience and helped strengthen my
  understanding of various AI technologies.

  [Background]{.underline}

  With the rise of AI and NLP technologies, there has been an increasing
  demand for intelligent systems capable of processing and understanding
  human language. This internship focused on developing two such
  systems: an extractive summarization tool and a medical Q\\&A chatbot.
---

The tasks completed during the internship were not treated as isolated
projects but were carefully designed to align with and extend the
learning objectives of a data science curriculum. The extractive
summarization task introduced fundamental text processing and NLP
concepts, which were further utilized and enhanced in the medical Q&A
chatbot. Together, these tasks form an integrated application of natural
language processing (NLP), where summarization techniques can be
embedded into chatbot responses for concise and informative user
interaction. This reflects a real-world pipeline approach and
demonstrates the application of course knowledge in building
intelligent, user-centric systems.

[Learning Objectives]{.underline}

\* Understand and implement NLP techniques such as extractive
summarization and information retrieval.

\* Gain hands-on experience with real-world datasets (e.g., MedQuAD).

\* Build applications that can summarize documents and answer user
queries.

\* Learn the workflow of data preprocessing, model development,
evaluation, and deployment.

\* Develop coding best practices and version control using GitHub.

[Activities and Tasks]{.underline}

***Task 1: Extractive Summarization***

I developed a Python-based tool that implements extractive summarization
using the TextRank algorithm. This tool analyzes the content of a long
document and selects the most important sentences to form a concise
summary.

\* Loaded and cleaned text documents.

\* Used TF-IDF vectorization to score sentence importance.

Selected top-ranked sentences to generate a summary.

***Task 2: Medical Q\\&A Chatbot***

I built a simple chatbot that answers medical questions using the
MedQuAD dataset.

\* Parsed and cleaned XML files containing medical Q\\&A pairs.

\* Used TF-IDF-based cosine similarity to match user queries with
relevant answers.

Created a functional chatbot interface for user interaction.

[Skills and Competencies]{.underline}

\* Python Programming

\* Natural Language Processing (NLP)

\* TF-IDF Vectorization

\* Cosine Similarity

\* Data Preprocessing (Pandas, XML Parsing)

\* Git and GitHub for version control

[Feedback and Evidence]{.underline}

\* All tasks were documented with working code in Jupyter Notebooks.

\* The projects were uploaded to GitHub with complete requirements
files.

\* Daily reports were submitted through the required Google Forms.

[Challenges and Solutions]{.underline}

**Challenge** : Parsing complex XML files in MedQuAD dataset.

**Solution** : Wrote robust functions with error handling to skip
malformed files.

**Challenge** : Identifying the most relevant answer from a large
dataset.

**Solution** : Applied TF-IDF vectorization and cosine similarity for
accurate retrieval.

[Outcomes and Impact]{.underline}

\* Successfully completed two real-world tasks.

\* Gained experience in applying NLP techniques to practical
applications.

\* Improved understanding of working with medical data and text
summarization.

\* Contributed to open-source repositories with clean, documented code.

[Conclusion]{.underline}

This internship has been a valuable experience in applying Data Science
skills to real-world projects. I have improved my technical skills,
learned how to approach and solve real problems, and gained confidence
in deploying AI-powered solutions. I look forward to applying these
skills in future academic and professional endeavors.
